1 Developments in philosophy of mind
Philosophy of mind in the English-speaking world has been dominated by two main ambitions throughout most of the twentieth century – to avoid
causal mysteries about the workings of the mind, and to meet scepticism
about other minds by providing a reasonable account of what we can
know, or justifiably infer, about the mental states of other people. So most
work in this field has been governed by two constraints, which we will call
naturalism and psychological knowledge.
According to naturalism human beings are complex biological organisms and as such are part of the natural order, being subject to the same
laws of nature as everything else in the world. If we are going to stick to a
naturalistic approach, then we cannot allow that there is anything to the
mind which needs to be accounted for by invoking vital spirits, incorporeal
souls, astral planes, or anything else which cannot be integrated with
natural science. Amongst the thorniest questions for naturalism are
whether thoughts with representational content (the so-called intentional
states such as beliefs and desires, which have the distinctive characteristic
of being about something), and whether experiences with phenomenal
properties (which have distinctive subjective feels, and which are like
something to undergo), are themselves suitable for integration within the
corpus of scientific knowledge. We will be addressing these issues in
chapters 7 and 9 respectively. Psychological knowledge has two aspects, depending upon whether our
knowledge is of other people or of ourselves. Different accounts of the
mental will yield different stories about how we can have knowledge of it,
or indeed whether we can have such knowledge at all. So a theory of mind
ought to fit in with a reasonable view of the extent and nature of psychological knowledge. The details of the fit are a somewhat delicate matter. It
must be conceded that both empirical evidence and theoretical considerations might force revisions to common-sense thinking about psychological knowledge. But the constraint of psychological knowledge does apply
some pressure, because a theory is not at liberty to trample our commonsense conceptions without adequate motivation. In other words, there may
be reasons to revise what we ordinarily think about psychological knowledge, but such reasons should be independent of the need to uphold any
particular theory of the mind.
So far as knowledge of others is concerned, the constraint would seem
to be as follows. In general, there is no serious doubt that other people do
have thoughts and feelings just as we ourselves do (although we discuss
the claims of eliminativism about the mental in chapter 2). And in particular cases we can know what it is that other people are thinking, whether
they are happy or disappointed, what they intend, and what they are
afraid of. Such knowledge is, however, not always easy to come by and in
many instances behavioural or situational evidence may not be sufficient
for any firm beliefs about another person’s states of mind. Hence our
psychological knowledge of others is not direct and immediate. It may or
may not involve conscious inference about the thoughts and feelings of
others. But even where no conscious inference is involved, our knowledge
of other minds is dependent upon informational cues (from conduct,
expression, tone of voice, and situation) – as can be seen from the fact that
these cues can be manipulated by people who lie convincingly, pretend to
be pleased when they are not, or make us forget for a while that they are
just acting.
So far as knowledge of ourselves is concerned, while there can be such a
thing as self-deception, we are vastly better informed than we are even
about the psychological states of our nearest and dearest. In part this is
because we have a huge store of past experiences, feelings and attitudes
recorded in memory. But we would underestimate the asymmetry between
self-knowledge and knowledge of others, if we represented it as just
knowing more, in much the way that one knows more about one’s hometown than other places. Self-knowledge differs from knowledge of others
in that one seems to know in a different way and with a special sort of
authority, at least in the case of one’s present mental states. We seem to
have a peculiarly direct sort of knowledge of what we are currently thinking and feeling. We do not seem to be reliant on anything in the way
of evidence (as we would be if we were making inferences from our own
situation and behaviour) and yet it hardly seems possible for us to be
mistaken on such matters.
With the constraints of naturalism and psychological knowledge explained, we shall now review very briefly some of the main developments in
twentieth-century philosophy of mind which form the back-drop to the
main body of this book.
1.1 Dualism
Dualism comes in two forms – weak and strong. Strong dualism (often
called ‘Cartesian dualism’) is the view that mind and body are quite
distinct kinds of thing – while bodies are physical things, extended in space,
which are subject to the laws of physics and chemistry, minds do not take
up any space, are not composed of matter, and as such are not subject to
physical laws. Weak dualism allows that the subject of both mental and
physical properties may be a physical thing – a human being, in fact. But it
claims that mental properties are not physical ones, and can vary independently of physical properties. Ever since Ryle’s The Concept of Mind (1949)
rejection of dualism has been the common ground from which philosophers of mind have started out. Almost everyone now agrees that there is
no such thing as mind-stuff, and that the subject of mental properties and
events is a physical thing. And almost everyone now maintains that mental
properties supervene on physical ones, at least, in such a way that it is
impossible for two individuals to share all of the same physical properties,
but differ in their mental ones.
Much the most popular and influential objection to dualism (of either
variety) concerns the problem of causal interaction between the mental and
the physical. (Another objection is that dualism faces notorious problems
in accounting for our psychological knowledge of others.) It seems uncontentious that there can be both physical causes which produce mental
changes, and also mental events which cause bodily movements and,
subsequently, changes in the physical environment. Perception illustrates
the former causal direction: something happens and you notice it happening. Intentional action illustrates the mental-to-physical causal direction: after reflection you decide that the sofa would look better by the
window, and this decision causes you to go in for some muscular exertions
which in turn cause the sofa to get re-located. Such commonplaces are
fundamental to our understanding of the relation between minds and their
environment. But how such causal interactions could ever occur becomes
mysterious on any consistently dualistic position, unless we are prepared to accept causal interaction between physical and mental events as a brute
fact. And even if we are prepared to accept this, it is mysterious where in
the brain mental events would be supposed to make an impact, given that
enough is already known about the brain, and about the activities of nerve
cells, to warrant us in believing that every brain-event will have a sufficient physical cause.
We cannot pause here to develop these and other arguments against
dualism in anything like a convincing way. Our purpose has only been to
give a reminder of why physicalism of one sort or another is now the
default approach in the philosophy of mind. (Which is not to say, of course, that physicalism is unchallengeable. On the contrary, in chapter 9
we shall be considering arguments which have convinced many people that
phenomenally conscious mental states – states with a distinctive subjective
feel to them – are not physical.)
1.2 Logical behaviourism
The classic exposition of logical behaviourism is Ryle, 1949. His leading
idea was that it is a mistake to treat talk about the mental as talk about
inner causes and then go on to ask whether those causes are physical or
not. To think this way, according to Ryle, is to commit a category-mistake.
Talk about the mental is not talk about mysterious inner causes of behaviour, it is rather a way of talking about dispositions to behave and patterns
of behaviour.
Behaviourism did have some attractions. It allowed humans to be
included within the order of nature by avoiding postulation of anything
‘ghostly’ inside the organic machinery of the body. It also promised a
complete (perhaps too complete) defence of our psychological knowledge
of the minds of others, for knowing about others’ minds was simply
reduced to knowing about their behavioural dispositions. Furthermore, it
seemed to be right, as Ryle pointed out, that people can correctly be
described as knowing this or believing that, irrespective of what is going on
inside them at the time – indeed, even when they are asleep.
The deficiencies of behaviourism were even more apparent, however.
What always seemed most implausible about logical behaviourism was
that knowledge of one’s own mind would consist in knowledge of one’s
behavioural dispositions, since this hardly left room for the idea of first person authority about one’s thoughts and feelings. The point that some of
our mentalistic discourse is dispositional rather than episodic had to be
conceded to Ryle. But then again, some of our mentalistic discourse is
episodic rather than dispositional. Surely a sudden realisation, or a vivid
recollection, or a momentary feeling of revulsion cannot be treated as a disposition. There are, it would seem, mental events. What is more, the fact
that beliefs, knowledge and desires can be long-standing rather than
fleeting and episodic is by no means a decisive argument that they are
dispositions to behaviour. Their durational nature is equally compatible
with their being underlying states with a lasting causal role or potential (as
argued in Armstrong, 1973).
Logical behaviourism was offered as a piece of conceptual analysis. It
was supposed to be an account of what had all along been the import of
our psychological discourse. Allegedly, theoreticians had misconstrued
our talk about the mind and loaded it with theoretical implications of
unobserved mental mechanisms never intended in ordinary usage. That
being the Rylean stance, the most serious technical criticism of logical
behaviourism is that it fails on its own terms, as an exercise in analysis.
According to behaviourism what look like imputations of internal mental
events or states should actually be construed as ‘iffy’ or conditional statements about people’s actual and possible behaviour. The first objection to
the pretensions of behaviourist conceptual analysis, then, is that nobody
has ever actually produced a single completed example of the behavioural
content of such an analysis. In itself, this objection might not have been
fatal. Ryle suggested such cases as solubility and brittleness as analogous
to behavioural dispositions. To say that something is soluble or brittle is
to say something about what it would do if immersed in water, or if struck
by a solid object. Now, admittedly, there is a disanalogy, because there is
just one standard way in which such dispositional properties as solubility
and brittleness can be manifested (that is, by dissolving and by breaking
into fragments). But no doubt there are more complex dispositional properties, both psychological and non-psychological. If there are various
ways in which a complex dispositional property can be manifested, then
spelling out in terms of conditionals what the attribution of such a dispositional property amounts to might well be an exceedingly difficult and
lengthy task.
There is, however, a follow-up to the initial complaint about behaviourist analyses (and their non-appearance, in any detailed form), which not
only blows away this flimsy line of defence, but also reveals a deeper flaw in
behaviourism. Suppose I am walking along and come to believe that rain is
about to start bucketing down. Do I make haste to take shelter? Well I may
do so, of course, but that all depends. It depends upon such things as how
much I care about getting wet, and also upon what I think and how much I
care about other things which might be affected by an attempt to find
shelter – such as my chances of catching the last train, or my reputation as
a hard-as-nails triathlete. As Davidson (1970) pointed out, a particular
belief or desire only issues in conduct in concert with, and under the influence of, other intentional states of the agent. There is no way, therefore, of saying what someone who holds a certain belief will do in a given
situation, without also specifying what other beliefs and desires that agent
holds. So analysis of a belief or a desire as a behavioural disposition
requires invoking other beliefs and desires. This point has convinced
practically everyone that Ryle was wrong. A belief or a desire does not just
consist in a disposition to certain sorts of behaviour. On the contrary, our
common-sense psychology construes these states as internal states of the
agent which play a causal role in producing behaviour, as we shall go on to
argue in chapter 2.
1.3 Identity theory
With dualism and logical behaviourism firmly rejected, attempts since the
1960s to give a philosophical account of the status of the mental have
centred on some combination of identity theory and functionalism. Indeed,
one could fairly say that the result of debates over the last forty years has
been to establish some sort of functionalist account of mental concepts
combined with token-identity theory (plus commitment to a thesis of
supervenience of mental properties on physical ones) as the orthodox
position in the philosophy of mind. There is quite a bit of jargon to be
unpacked here, especially as labels like ‘functionalism’ and ‘identity theory’ are used in various disciplines for positions between which only
tenuous connections hold. In the philosophy of mind, functionalism is a
view about mentalistic concepts, namely that they represent mental states
and events as differentiated by the functions, or causal roles, which they
have, both in relation to behaviour and to other mental states and events;
whereas identity theory is a thesis about what mental states or events are,
namely that they are identical with states or events of the brain (or of the
central nervous system).
There are two distinct versions of identity theory which have been the
focus of philosophical debate – type-identity theory and token-identity
theory. Both concentrate on an alleged identity between mental states and
events, on the one hand, and brain states and processes, on the other,
rather than between mind and brain en masse. Type-identity theory holds
that each type of mental state is identical with some particular type of
brain state – for example, that pain is the firing of C-fibres. Token-identity
theory maintains that each particular mental state or event (a ‘token’ being
a datable particular rather than a type – such as Gussie’s twinge of
toothache at 4 pm on Tuesday, rather than pain in general) is identical with
some brain state or event, but allows that individual instances of the same
mental type may be instances of different types of brain state or event Type-identity theory was first advocated as a hypothesis about correlations between sensations and brain processes which would be discovered by neuroscience (Place, 1956; Smart, 1959; Armstrong, 1968). Its
proponents claimed that the identity of mental states with brain states was
supported by correlations which were just starting to be established by
neuroscience, and that this constituted a scientific discovery akin to other
type-identities, such as heat is molecular motion, lightning is electrical
discharge, and water is H2O. In those early days, during the 1950s and 60s,
the identity theory was advanced as a theory which was much the best bet
about the future course of neuroscientific investigation.
Yet there were certainly objections which were troublesome for those
who shared the naturalistic sympathies of the advocates of type-identity. A
surprising, and surely unwelcome, consequence of the theory was an
adverse prognosis for the prospects of work in artificial intelligence. For if
a certain cognitive psychological state, say a thought that P, is actually to
be identified with a certain human neurophysiological state, then the
possibility of something non-human being in such a state is excluded. Nor
did it seem right to make the acceptance of the major form of physicalist
theory so dependent upon correlations which might be established in the
future. Did that mean that if the correlations were not found one would be
forced to accept either dualism or behaviourism?
But most important was the point that confidence in such type-correlations is misplaced. So far from this being a good bet about what
neuroscience will reveal, it seems a very bad bet, both in relation to
sensations and in relation to intentional states such as thoughts. For
consider a sensation type, such as pain. It might be that whenever humans
feel pain, there is always a certain neurophysiological process going on (for
example, C-fibres firing). But creatures of many different Earthly species
can feel pain. One can also imagine life-forms on different planets which
feel pain, even though they are not closely similar in their physiology to
any terrestrial species. So, quite likely, a given type of sensation is correlated with lots of different types of neurophysiological states. Much the
same can be argued in the case of thoughts. Presumably it will be allowed
that speakers of different natural languages can think thoughts of the same
type, classified by content. Thus an English speaker can think that a storm
is coming; but so, too, can a Bedouin who speaks no English. (And, quite
possibly, so can a languageless creature such as a camel.) It hardly seems
plausible that every thought with a given content is an instance of some
particular type of neural state, especially as these thoughts would cause
their thinkers to express them in quite different ways in different natural
languages.
The only way in which a type-identity thesis could still be maintained, given the variety of ways in which creatures might have sensations of the
same type and the variety of ways in which thinkers might have thoughts of
the same type, would be to make sensations and intentional states identical, not with single types of neurophysiological state, but with some
disjunctive list of state-types. So pain, for example, might be neuro-state H
(in a human), or neuro-state R (in a rat), or neuro-state O (in an octopus),
or . . . and so on. This disjunctive formulation is an unattractive complication for type-identity theory. Above all, it is objectionable that there
should be no available principle which can be invoked to put a stop to such
a disjunctive list and prevent it from having an indeterminate length.
The conclusion which has been drawn from these considerations is that
type-identity theory is unsatisfactory, because it is founded on an assumption that there will be one–one correlations between mental state types
and physical state types. But this assumption is not just a poor bet on the
outcome of future research. There is something about our principles of
classification for mental state types which makes it more seriously misguided, so that we are already in a position to anticipate that the correlations will not be one–one, but one–many – one mental state type will be
correlated with many different physical state types. If we are to retain a
basic commitment to naturalism, we will take mental states always to be
realised in physical states of some type and so will conclude that mental
state types are multiply realised. This is where functionalism comes in,
offering a neat explanation of why it is that mental state types should be
multiply realisable. Consequently, multiple realisability of the mental is
standardly given as the reason for preferring a combination of functionalism and a token-identity thesis, according to which each token mental state
or process is (is identical with) some physical state or process.
1.4 Functionalism
The guiding idea behind functionalism is that some concepts classify things
by what they do. For example, transmitters transmit something, while
aerials are objects positioned so as to receive air-borne signals. Indeed,
practically all concepts for artefacts are functional in character. But so,
too, are many concepts applied to living things. Thus, wings are limbs for
flying with, eyes are light-sensitive organs for seeing with, and genes are
biological structures which control development. So perhaps mental concepts are concepts of states or processes with a certain function. This idea
has been rediscovered in Aristotle’s writings (particularly in De anima). Its
introduction into modern philosophy of mind is chiefly due to Putnam
(1960, 1967; see also Lewis, 1966).
Functionalism has seemed to be the answer to several philosophical prayers. It accounts for the multiple realisability of mental states, the chief
stumbling-block for an ‘immodest’ type-identity theory. And it also has
obvious advantages over behaviourism, since it accords much better with
ordinary intuitions about causal relations and psychological knowledge –
it allows mental states to interact and influence each other, rather than
being directly tied to behavioural dispositions; and it gives an account of
our understanding of the meaning of mentalistic concepts which avoids
objectionable dependence on introspection while at the same time unifying
the treatment of first-person and third-person cases. Finally, it remains
explicable that dualism should ever have seemed an option – although we
conceptualise mental states in terms of causal roles, it can be a contingent
matter what actually occupies those causal roles; and it was a conceptual
possibility that the role-occupiers might have turned out to be composed
of mind-stuff.
Multiple realisability is readily accounted for in the case of functional
concepts. Since there may be more than one way in which a particular
function, /-ing, can be discharged, things of various different compositions can serve that function and hence qualify as /-ers. Think of valves,
for example, which are to be found inside both your heart and (say)
your central heating system. So while mental types are individuated in
terms of a certain sort of pattern of causes and effects, mental tokens
(individual instantiations of those patterns) can be (can be identical to,
or at least constituted by) instantiations of some physical type (such as
C-fibre firing).
According to functionalism, psychological knowledge will always be of
states with a certain role, characterised in terms of how they are produced
and of their effects on both other such states and behaviour. Functionalism does not by itself explain the asymmetry between knowledge of self
and knowledge of others. So it does need to be supplemented by some
account of how it is that knowledge of one’s own present mental states can
be both peculiarly direct and peculiarly reliable. How best to deliver this
account is certainly open to debate, but does not appear to be a completely
intractable problem. (We view this problem as demanding a theory of
consciousness, since the mental states one knows about in a peculiarly
direct way are conscious ones – see chapter 9.) But if there is still unfinished business in the first-person case, one of functionalism’s chief
sources of appeal has been the plausible treatment it provides for psychological knowledge of others. Our attribution of mental states to others fits
their situations and reactions and is justified as an inference to the best
explanation of their behaviour. This view places our psychological knowledge of others on a par with theoretical knowledge, in two respects.
Firstly, the functional roles assigned to various mental states depend upon systematic relations between such states and their characteristic causes
and effects. So it seems that we have a common-sense theory of mind, or a
‘folk psychology’, which implicitly defines ordinary psychological concepts. Secondly, the application of that theory is justified in the way that
theories usually are, namely by success in prediction and explanation.
We hasten to insert here an important distinction between the justification for our beliefs about the minds of others and what causes us to
have such beliefs. In particular applications to individuals on specific
occasions, we may draw inferences which are justified both by the evidence
available and our general folk psychology, and may draw some such
inferences (rather than others) precisely because we recognise them to be
justified. But while our theory of mind can be justified by our predictive
and explanatory successes in a vast number of such particular applications, we do not, in general, apply that theory because we have seen it to
be justified. To echo Hume’s remarks about induction, we say that this is
not something which nature has left up to us. As we shall be arguing in
chapters 3 and 4, it is part of our normal, native, cognitive endowment to
apply such a theory of mind – in fact, we cannot help but think about each
other in such terms.
So far we have been painting a rosy picture of functionalism. But, as
usual, there have been objections. The two main problems with analytical
functionalism (that is, functionalism as a thesis about the correct analysis
of mental state concepts) are as follows:
(1) It is committed to the analytic/synthetic distinction, which many
philosophers think (after Quine, 1951) to be unviable. And it is certainly
hard to decide quite which truisms concerning the causal role of a mental
state should count as analytic (true in virtue of meaning), rather than just
obviously true. (Consider examples such as that belief is the sort of state
which is apt to be induced through perceptual experience and liable to
combine with desire; that pain is an experience frequently caused by bodily
injury or organic malfunction, liable to cause characteristic behavioural
manifestations such as groaning, wincing and screaming; and so on.)
(2) Another commonly voiced objection against functionalism is that it
is incapable of capturing the felt nature of conscious experience (Block
and Fodor, 1972; Nagel, 1974; Jackson, 1982, 1986). Objectors have urged
that one could know everything about the functional role of a mental state
and yet still have no inkling as to what it is like to be in that state – its
so-called quale. Moreover, some mental states seem to be conceptualised
purely in terms of feel; at any rate, with beliefs about causal role taking a
secondary position. For example, it seems to be just the feel of pain which
is essential to it (Kripke, 1972). We seem to be able to imagine pains which
occupy some other causal role; and we can imagine states having the causal role of pain which are not pains (which lack the appropriate kind of
feel).
1.5 The theory-theory
In response to such difficulties, many have urged that a better variant of
functionalism is theory-theory (Lewis, 1966, 1970, 1980; Churchland, 1981;
Stich, 1983). According to this view, mental state concepts (like theoretical
concepts in science) get their life and sense from their position in a
substantive theory of the causal structure and functioning of the mind.
And on this view, to know what a belief is (to grasp the concept of belief) is
to know sufficiently much of the theory of mind within which that concept
is embedded. All the benefits of analytic functionalism are preserved. But
there need be no commitment to the viability of an analytic/synthetic
distinction.
What of the point that some mental states can be conceptualised purely
or primarily in terms of feel? A theory-theorist can allow that we have
recognitional capacities for some of the theoretical entities characterised by
the theory. (Compare the diagnostician who can recognise a cancer –
immediately and without inference – in the blur of an X-ray photograph.)
But it can be claimed that the concepts employed in such capacities are also
partly characterised by their place in the theory – it is a recognitional
application of a theoretical concept. Moreover, once someone possesses a
recognitional concept, there can be nothing to stop them prising it apart
from its surrounding beliefs and theories, to form a concept which is barely
recognitional. Our hypothesis can be that this is what takes place when
people say that it is conceptually possible that there should be pains with
quite different causal roles.
While some or other version of theory-theory is now the dominant
position in the philosophy of mind, this is not to say that there are no
difficulties, and no dissenting voices. This is where we begin in chapter 2:
we shall be considering different construals of the extent of our folk psychological commitments, contrasting realist with instrumentalist accounts, and considering whether it is possible that our folk psychology
might – as a substantive theory of the inner causes of behaviour – turn
out to be a radically false theory, ripe for elimination. Then in chapter 4
we shall be considering a recent rival to theory-theory, the so-called
simulationist account of our folk-psychological abilities. And in chapters
7 and 9 we consider the challenges posed for any naturalistic account of
the mental (and for theory-theory in particular) by the intentionality (or
‘aboutness’) of our mental states, and by the phenomenal properties (or
‘feel’) of our experiences.
In fact one of the main messages of this book is that the theory-theory
account of our common-sense psychology is a fruitful framework for
considering the relations between folk and scientific psychologies, and so is
to that extent, at least, a progressive research programme (in the sense of
Lakatos, 1970).

