1.5 The theory-theory
In response to such difficulties, many have urged that a better variant of
functionalism is theory-theory (Lewis, 1966, 1970, 1980; Churchland, 1981;
Stich, 1983). According to this view, mental state concepts (like theoretical
concepts in science) get their life and sense from their position in a
substantive theory of the causal structure and functioning of the mind.
And on this view, to know what a belief is (to grasp the concept of belief) is
to know sufficiently much of the theory of mind within which that concept
is embedded. All the benefits of analytic functionalism are preserved. But
there need be no commitment to the viability of an analytic/synthetic
distinction.
What of the point that some mental states can be conceptualised purely
or primarily in terms of feel? A theory-theorist can allow that we have
recognitional capacities for some of the theoretical entities characterised by
the theory. (Compare the diagnostician who can recognise a cancer –
immediately and without inference – in the blur of an X-ray photograph.)
But it can be claimed that the concepts employed in such capacities are also
partly characterised by their place in the theory – it is a recognitional
application of a theoretical concept. Moreover, once someone possesses a
recognitional concept, there can be nothing to stop them prising it apart
from its surrounding beliefs and theories, to form a concept which is barely
recognitional. Our hypothesis can be that this is what takes place when
people say that it is conceptually possible that there should be pains with
quite different causal roles.
While some or other version of theory-theory is now the dominant
position in the philosophy of mind, this is not to say that there are no
difficulties, and no dissenting voices. This is where we begin in chapter 2:
we shall be considering different construals of the extent of our folk psychological commitments, contrasting realist with instrumentalist accounts, and considering whether it is possible that our folk psychology
might – as a substantive theory of the inner causes of behaviour – turn
out to be a radically false theory, ripe for elimination. Then in chapter 4
we shall be considering a recent rival to theory-theory, the so-called
simulationist account of our folk-psychological abilities. And in chapters
7 and 9 we consider the challenges posed for any naturalistic account of
the mental (and for theory-theory in particular) by the intentionality (or
‘aboutness’) of our mental states, and by the phenomenal properties (or
‘feel’) of our experiences.
In fact one of the main messages of this book is that the theory-theory
account of our common-sense psychology is a fruitful framework for
considering the relations between folk and scientific psychologies, and so is
to that extent, at least, a progressive research programme (in the sense of
Lakatos, 1970).

